00:00:00 Speaker 1
if you move your screen you will if you move your mouse up to the top of your screen you'll see you will get be able to activate an annotate icon annotate icon if you click on it you'll be able to see that you can select a number of either arrows or dots or put your name down if you would like to just uh quickly put a dot along your name where you are currently uh coming to uh to me from.
00:00:33 Speaker 1
which country area you are living in so i think if you're an idea of how to use the annotation tool, so it starts in victoria it's in queensland it means that because i was in south america my goodness that must be very early in the morning over there, some from indonesia, Mostly from Australia. That's great. Just to give you a quick opportunity.
00:01:05 Speaker 1
That's from, looks like Japan or Korea, maybe? Thank you. Now I know that in beautiful New Caledonia. What a great place to live. All right, we'll leave it there. I hope everybody's had an opportunity. So you'll see these opportunities come up from time to time to add value through using tools on your annotation tool. And so that's available to you by looking at the, by bringing your arrow up to the top of the screen.
00:01:36 Speaker 1
We'll leave it on for now. So the first thing that I want to talk about is the context for JAWC. So the JAWC code is a reporting code for exploration results, mineral resources and ores. aspects of the JORC code are those principles that relate to transparency, materiality and, competence. So the competent person who is the person signing off on these public releases.
00:02:14 Speaker 1
has obligations as to the JORC code and to their professional associations. So in Australia we have two main professional organisations and they are, the AUSIMN and also the Australian Institute of Geoscientists. But there's a third party in Australia that helped form the Dr Research Committee that generated the JORC code and that is the.
00:02:45 Speaker 1
Minerals Council of Australia. So those three members are the key members in the Commission. We have in Australia, as in many places in the world, companies reporting to local stock exchanges. In Australia, it's the Australian Securities Exchange, the ASX. And the ASX has a very large set of rules, as well as government regulatory guidelines.
00:03:18 Speaker 1
And this is related to our Australian Securities and Investment Commission, which is ASIC. ASIC provides guides to companies on how they must report in accordance with the law. The JORC code tells you, as a competent person, how to employ these resources and reserves. It doesn't tell you how to do the work.
00:03:48 Speaker 1
It tells you how to report it, and this is one of the very critical steps you must understand. A JORC is not prescriptive. It tells you what you must report and how you must report it, but it doesn't tell you how to do it. So that's one really clear thing that we need to make very early on. Why is joking important in other jurisdictions? Well, obviously from the point of view of Australia, we've got government regulations through ASIC.
00:04:26 Speaker 1
We've got the stock exchanges, the securities exchange that companies pay their fees on. But there are also industry bodies that are embedded as part of understanding and wanting to understand what companies are reporting and how they report. Overseas, obviously, there are other regulators, there are governments, there are stock exchanges overseas like Singapore, Hong Kong, the English market, the alternative investment market,
00:05:00 Speaker 1
AIM, and also P&G, of course, and there are registered professional organisation jurisdictions, associated with the PERSCO code, which is the international reporting code that CERC is a member of. Many of your countries that you are talking about, whether it's Indonesia, or the Philippines or Canada, are partners in the PERSCO code. It is an international.
00:05:30 Speaker 1
reporting code template. And these codes all have very similar structures to have wording that puts them in line with other countries so that if you are reporting in, say, Chile, those that they might report in Chile is understandable and comparable to reporting codes in Australia and England and South Africa.
00:06:01 Speaker 1
We will do a lot more about what jurisdictions, overseas jurisdictions are important when we get to Module 6. So that will be taught by somebody else, but there's quite a lot more detail to come about those overseas jurisdictions. So I will open up the floor to chat via the chat. If you want to have a complex discussion, put your hand up.
00:06:33 Speaker 1
and I can listen to what you have to say. But sometimes it's easier to stack the chat questions up. But when you're ready to ask a question which might relate to Module 1, I'd prefer it if it sticks generally to the Module 1 syllabus because you'll have plenty of opportunity to talk to some of the other experts in the modules later as part of your learning.
00:07:05 Speaker 1
But I'm happy to break anything. I'm going to give you my opinion such as it's worth. And I have a very broad range of experience in both exploration, in mining, and also in understanding what ore reserves are about. So if you have a question, just let me know. In the meantime, while you're getting your block processors in place to maybe ask some questions, there's a discussion point to give you some prompts to help you use the chat.
00:07:41 Speaker 1
Don't forget that if you want to use, if you can't see the chat window, then you just go to the screen at the top, and you should be able to see the chat function, and that will enable you to see that box, and you can type your questions. So, using that chat function, I'd like you to answer me, why were the Poseidon and Breax matters important to regulators?
00:08:12 Speaker 1
What were the things that were critical to the regulators in those circumstances? What did they want? What did they not want? How would you use those case histories and what would they take away? And regulator, what is important to you. 
00:08:36 Speaker 2
So, just fill out the chat box and hopefully I'll start to see some messages. See any yet. 
00:08:53 Speaker 1
Is anybody having any problems reading the chat box? There we go, can return to the background system the information provided to potential investors. Certainly, absolutely, along the lines of what we want to talk about. Anybody else got some other items they'd like to throw into the mix?
00:09:25 Speaker 1
Obviously, for some of you, English is not your first language, and so I appreciate that you don't need to give me perfect English, just give me the best you can. That's great, now they're starting to flow. Mineral exploration transparency, accountability. These cases report to the creation of laws to regulate how you report. Absolutely. The Bre-X case really kicked off the Canadian regulation system,
00:10:00 Speaker 1
the National Instrument 43-101 system. So there's obviously a famous film about it called Gold, and it gives you an elaborate view of what did happen, you know, there's facts around what happened, and it was absolutely somebody trying to rip off the industry.
00:10:25 Speaker 2
You know, they were sorting off the samples, which made the reporting for the results completely unread. So I think there's a lot to be learned about those examples, and they look just as tough.
00:10:43 Speaker 3
Sometimes, if we look at the data, it's different than it is. Yeah, but sometimes it's like, it can be just one bar, one bar, and then it's like, there it is. So I need you to match that up. Yeah, you can try, but try not to put the route inside, which one, that route, try not to put inside, yeah, it's a little too hot, too hot one thing and affects the Wi-Fi activity, oh, yeah, so it's going to feel like noise, okay, so, AVDS is still quite good, let me check on the, yeah, that's it.
00:11:18 Speaker 1
...public, in school, better confidence in those areas, and the director is now in jail, so, you know, there are instances where regulation, you're really, really important, it's always going to be somebody who wants to be criminal in nature, it's a really interesting point, you know, how many cases have we had like that in Australia, I mean, the Poseidon case,
00:11:49 Speaker 1
Probably it wasn't quite what I would say a criminal case, it was certainly over-stated and it wasn't, you know, compared to something like Breax or the Canadian ones that have happened more recently.
00:12:03 Speaker 2
It's not what I would call criminal, it was just not transparently reported. It didn't give them information that allowed the investor to make an assessment based on all the information.
00:12:24 Speaker 1
These are really, really important things that we have to learn and why the codes are really important that they stay up to date. I will mention here that the code that we're talking about here, the Job Code 2012, the current upgrades for the Job Code are Progress. I'm lucky enough to be assisting the job committee and we have advanced things significantly in updating the code.
00:12:55 Speaker 1
There have been some very periods of slow reactions from the organisations that need to approve the code, like the ASX and ASIC. And so we're just working through the government organisations to make sure that the code, when it's finally published, is in alignment with what their expectations are. So it's still happening.
00:13:27 Speaker 1
Let's have another question. that you have in relation to some of the learnings that you've been through or you have likely, put your hand up and I'm happy to talk to you. Here's another question. If a public report is made by a competent person that is not reported in accordance with the draw code, to M.G.U. you can play.
00:13:56 Speaker 4
But what's the difference between a CF and a six. 
00:13:59 Speaker 5
what's the difference between them. 
00:14:00 Speaker 3
If your device, your desktop is compatible with Wi-Fi 7, then you can use it to connect. But I don't think so here because this is quite different.
00:14:12 Speaker 1
It's the RPO, it's the organization, to whom they are reporting under. So not the ASX, you can report the company to the ASX. So say, can I make an announcement? that is not in accordance with the code, you can highlight it to the ASX and say my understanding is this is not written in accordance with the code and they would approach the company.
00:14:46 Speaker 5
The question here is quite specific and that is the competent person issue, the competent. 
00:14:55 Speaker 1
who do you complain to about the competent person and it's the organization that that person is a member of. Is there a member of, as they are in Australia, many of the proponents are a member of both.
00:15:10 Speaker 5
the AUS-IMM and the AIG, who would you complain to? Well you could complain to both but either is relevant because there's communication, between the AIG and the AUS-IMM so that is one whitelist. person for whatever reason, then that's published and taken across into the other organisation, as well. So yeah, as a confident person, your duty is to the code of ethics. It's the code.
00:15:44 Speaker 5
of ethics of your professional body that holds you accountable and holds you to being able to report. If you're not a member of an organisation, you can't report on the ASICs because the job code demands that you are a member of an organisation that has a code of ethics. So these are subtle things, but very important that you understand them.
00:16:15 Speaker 5
So, yes, in the way of the OZIMM, the complaint would go in and it would be reviewed by a complaints committee.
00:16:24 Speaker 1
and then the ethics committee and then the complaints committee if that's the way it's pushed through. So there's a review and then it's pushed up the line for assessment. So, and thus, despite the OMBREC code being prepared in the licence area in my country, the company manipulated the analysis results to engage in speculation. In this case, what would be the responsibility of the competent person. 
00:16:52 Speaker 5
The investigation is ongoing. So, the OMBREC code is part of the Kazakhstan region.
00:17:03 Speaker 1
and the professional organisations don't necessarily exist. This is a government code. And it helps people to write in the courts with what the exchange.
00:17:21 Speaker 5
and the government want them to report. Now, in this case, I don't know the circumstances of JORC particularly well. I'm not an expert on the JORC code. But if the company has manipulated results, who is the who's responsible for the competent person well it depends who the competent person is or a member of in terms of professional organization the investigation is ongoing so i.
00:17:52 Speaker 5
yeah i'm not really sure about that that's not an area of my i haven't actually dealt with my code.
00:18:00 Speaker 2
myself um so i apologize if i've got that wrong um but in most circumstances turkey etc i was just thinking to self it wasn't therapy um and it's reporting in accordance with the talk now i will.
00:18:16 Speaker 1
uh i will refer to a question i do i thought i had i've got a picture there's a picture in the.
00:18:23 Speaker 5
in the um things that you could care about member organizations.
00:18:29 Speaker 1
so if it is i'm sure he has the professional organization so it should in my view be um.
00:18:39 Speaker 3
to have that, Thank you so much.
00:19:39 Speaker 4
And thank you so much for your time and for this really important and informative classroom. Hello, guys. so i would like just to ask you about one important thing that i wanted to make sure that i am clear on this so as a competent person responsibilities it is really clear according to your code close 11 how it's going to be and it is also some kind of debate between, let's say specialists by five years because some of the things that five years is so less to.
00:20:14 Speaker 4
consider so type of taking that kind of requirement so as a trusted professional engineer from the IMMM and also mm i would like to ask you what do you think and what is your approach and what is the ocean approach in terms of having a credency for the competent person as well because as i understood competent person status is like self-assessment it's not like according to some, so that is a little bit I'm not clear why a competent person is still is based on self-assessment.
00:20:50 Speaker 4
as making more sensitive so thank you I wanted to keep this really short my question thank you.
00:20:58 Speaker 2
yeah really good question and really well worth a discussion about so you know the draw code update.
00:21:08 Speaker 1
really stemmed from some questions that came from around exactly that issue, that the whole concept of self-assessment is one that's solved with potential misuse and because, commonly people don't know what they don't know and so how do we as a an industry manage that.
00:21:42 Speaker 1
If we look at the international codes that are in the family of the CRISCO mode reporting template, there are a range of random number of years requirement to be able to claim competency. And they range from 5 to 10 years. I think one is 15.
00:22:12 Speaker 1
And the committee looked very long and hard at this question for the drug code update. Where we landed on this is that we've recognised that just five years' experience in the deposit style, and mineralisation that you are reporting. is, broadly speaking, very wishy-washy,
00:22:46 Speaker 1
and it doesn't really go to competence. It just goes to experience. So we look long and hard at that, and we certainly feel that as we move into the next five to ten years, we will move to something that will be an accreditation, a testing of somebody's competence.
00:23:20 Speaker 1
We feel that a person in exploration has sufficient experience to report exploration results after five years of exploration activities. The answer to that is probably yes, because it's relatively straightforward in that you're reporting the results of your exploration experience. results from a drill hole, you're undertaking an exam, you know, how you composite, you know, what sort of methods associated with compositing your results and reporting them actively.
00:23:55 Speaker 1
So in our view, that's the least amount of issues that we have. Reporting these resources is a very complex issue because you not only have to have the geological experience of the mineralisation, you have to understand how the elements of interest are distributed, what is the geological past. scenario is it is it simple stratified deposit with very clear boundaries and so you know.
00:24:29 Speaker 1
it's and you're dealing with the sentence of material and you're dealing with no you know elements that could be uh conflicting in terms of uh penalty elements in it it's very straightforward you can in five years and you can like open coal may or may not be in that circumstance depending on how you uh again you know what you're trying to sell if it's metallurgical poles a lot more uh complex shall we say but the the issue with resource estimation is.
00:25:01 Speaker 1
that you you can press a button you can use simple tools and software these days to come up with a result very quickly and not know that you're completely wrong, And so having results estimation experience in training and getting a variety of styles, understanding what your variography means, how you use it, how you constrain high grades, all of these sorts of issues. So you not only, in my view, have to be experienced in the style of mineralisation, you also need to be experienced in understanding results estimation, your statistical parameters and what do they mean.
00:25:48 Speaker 1
So those aspects take more than five years. I've been in consulting for 15 years and every day I'm learning something new. So, you know, there's no... There's no way that somebody with only five years out of university experience should be... that they have competence in reporting a mineral resource, in my view, that's my personal view. Do you update for the joint code when it comes out? We'll continue with five years, but with a few extra words,
00:26:24 Speaker 1
which would say you need to have competence in all aspects. It will also be, as we move forward, once the code is locked in, the professional organisations are already moving towards how are we going to roll out accreditation, because it's such a critical thing, and we realise that we're undercutting it significantly. And it's the same with Ore First. So these are aspects that will change over time. They're not changing whatever the job 2026, 2027 comes out.
00:27:01 Speaker 1
We'll have the same... Basically, the same layout as job 2012 for competence. industry recognises that it's not as simple as that. So your question is a very good question, but it's still very difficult to roll out accreditation. That training is very difficult to measure. You have to have such a broad ranging coverage of skill sets and so the time needs to be generic. At this stage it's still self-assessment. That's a very long-winded answer,
00:27:38 Speaker 1
but it is incredibly important and you need to understand these things as potential competent people and I appreciate your question very much. Thank you. Thank you so much. Thank you so much.
00:27:53 Speaker 4
and I completely agree with you and I understand that some part should be self-assessment some part, but however considering this course and also final assessment questions, I think it is possible somehow to keep some part with accreditation as minimum to make sure that the person who is acting as a competent person knows how to report and the part that is related with specific their knowledge about how to do this is not regulated by JORC code is another more experienced thing that they need to consider. So thank you so much for your attention.
00:28:51 Speaker 1
Thank you. Look, if you're operating as a, you say you're an employee of a company, if you're an employee of a company, then your company should have the influence you need in terms of PR and PR. So that's, the company, you could ask that question because if they don't, then they, and they should, like all companies should have that.
00:29:24 Speaker 1
Yeah, yeah, yeah. So it's more, it's competent for the company itself to already have this insurance. I'm not CPing presently, but sort of gone that way, and that's why I was reading that going, okay. Yeah, yeah. It generally relates to people who are self-employed. Yeah. So if they're self-employed. If they're self-employed, they must have PR appeal. The organisations that I'm in and the AIG provide have news for you to discuss with people.
00:29:56 Speaker 1
who understand our industry and give you better rates than you if you go out and ask, you know, to buy from an insurance company because it's very complex in the areas that we deal with. Thanks for the question. Important question. Adrian says, okay, that bigger mining companies have in-house liability. Insurance EPs, that's correct. Dave asks, is there any hard and fast rules or cut-off criteria for the classification?
00:30:30 Speaker 1
Okay, let's get to the really hairy questions. What are criteria and classification? So, classification of resources is one of those ones that is... very much dependent on the competent person. It's what is your experience in learning and in resource reporting that tells you, I know I can use the words that are in the JORC code around how it specifies, inferred,
00:31:05 Speaker 1
indicated, measured resources. That is, I can infer that it's, connected between two drill holes. Before, I don't get the right words, it's been too long since I looked at the exact wording, but you know, those words that the code uses are really important to guide you on your assessment and your experience. The ability for you to go out to members in your peer group and say, hey,
00:31:40 Speaker 1
I'm looking at this model and I think this is indicated because of this, this, this and this. In essence, you have to ask yourself, if I stand up in a group of my peers and I can justify why I think this is indicated or measured and stand by that, that is your guide, that's your what-if scenario. Because there is no hard and fast rules. There is nothing that says, you can't do this.
00:32:16 Speaker 1
This is part of where self-assessment... needs to be looking outside the box a bit. You need to have people that you can talk to and use as what is scenarios. It's so important. In small companies, that's really, really difficult because you actually have confidentiality issues. If you're the only person who's the resource estimator in a small company, who do you ask?
00:32:46 Speaker 1
Well, ask a consulting group to help you. You don't have to get them to do it. You can just say, this is what I think, and it might take a little bit of money to get them to validate and check what you think. But those are the sorts of mechanisms you should go through as a competent person to give you the backup to say, yes, I've done everything in my power to make sure that I'm giving a classification that's defensible. You should never use the CEO or the chairman's rules about what they think the classification is because they're always going to want more confidence because that makes a difference to the share price.
00:33:32 Speaker 1
So if the competent person is your responsibility solely to make sure that the classification can stand up in a room of your peers, that's the ultimate arbiter.
00:33:44 Speaker 6
So Rod, would that mean so that given they would have to depend on possibly an external consultant's view on the modifying factors, so whether their resourcing is minable, content infrastructure, etc., so that competent person would... I was just mentioning, depending on someone else's expert opinion in that, would they have to be a competent person as well. 
00:34:16 Speaker 1
It depends on which area you're talking about, if we're talking about oil reserves. Obviously, from a mechanical mining point of view, you can rely on your engineers for mine planning. They've got to be competent people who are feeding into the oil reserves from understanding what gets mined as a potential block that's profitable at the lowest level of the mine. There are always a whole range of oil reserve questions that are outside the experience of the specific engineers.
00:34:52 Speaker 1
when it comes to infrastructure, environment, auction license. All of these issues that feed into the reasonable prospects for oil reserves. Eventually, I'd like extraction as it is currently. which were mentioned in reasonable prospects of eventual extraction then you must incorporate, people who are not in the competent person realm that are specialists. We have addressed this in the new code it's one of the areas that will be we won't have capital S specialists and they're.
00:35:27 Speaker 1
not going to be named but there'll be areas where they have an ability to be named in a, new statement a public statement as a person who's adding value to the experience in your reserve. So how do you make sure, as a competent person, that they're doing the right thing? Well, you've got to have the experience. You've got to have a little bit of understanding of what they're doing. So if you're dealing with underground results that are coming out of a geotechnical engineer,
00:36:00 Speaker 1
you need to understand what the geotechnical engineer is preferring. Even if they're not signing off on the actual reserve, their input's to your reserve. You need to understand that. What are the factors of safety? What are the slope angles? What's the, you know, all of these aspects, you need to be across. You need to understand them because you are responsible for that as the competent person.
00:36:25 Speaker 6
Thanks, Matt. No, it's my pleasure.
00:36:29 Speaker 1
So in Canada, with existing CPs, nearly two-year creditors, if you will, that's... of our problem it's a complex issue we think at the end of the day it's most likely that if we do when we bring in accreditation there will have to be some grand what we call grandfather clauses, which the people who have been accredited effectively for a number of years will accept the fact that they're competent without necessarily doing the full accreditation process.
00:37:01 Speaker 1
is how that will work in practice nobody's defined yet that's what we're thinking in general and as a study conducted in turkey i created the model using different computer programs but the results may not match exactly what's the price yes guys we're making an estimate would it be correct to take an average value because as far as i understand the JORC code so we should look around values oh well let's break that down a bit okay.
00:37:31 Speaker 1
There's several things that are not quite correct there. So an average value, well, yes, an estimate is an average. And if you run simulations to define the best scenario, which is, you know, conditional simulation technology has been around for a long time, modern estimation methodology demands, and, well, it doesn't demand, but it's recommending more and more that, you know, simulations are used to help guide.
00:38:03 Speaker 1
what is the average result that you would expect to get. So yes, an average is in that case fine because you are using a simulation to help you define what the best average is. But if you're saying I've done it by OK, by N-OK, by local indicator, kriging, and I'm going to use those three results, and I'm gonna take the average of them, and it's this number. It's not one model, then it's three models. So, no, in that circumstance, it's not appropriate.
00:38:35 Speaker 1
If it is one model, however you derive that model, if you're using a simulation, then it's the one simulation that gives you the best result. So, there's mixed sex. In fact, when you're talking about rounding values, one of the issues that we see all the time, people not applying appropriate rounding. The top record means, in fact, that you use appropriate rounding.
00:39:06 Speaker 1
So that if you're dealing with... an area where you're using the inferred resources and your estimates for volume can be plus or minus 25 percent easily then you need to make sure that your rounding is appropriately done you know it might be not one point to six million tons it might be one million tons plus or minus god knows what but you've got to define the accuracy in your rounding really really important you don't use.
00:39:39 Speaker 1
three decimal places in you know reporting a assay result it is one or two so rounding is a really critical part of the JORC code somebody had their hand up where is that uh you had your hand up, yes i can.
00:40:07 Speaker 7
Yeah, so thank you so much for giving me this opportunity. So I have one question that if a person has an IAM member but not CP, which type of report he can write and validate ethics for him? If a person is a member but not a CP, what kind of reports or in the strategy report or which kind of report they can write and validate? So this is my question. So you can, as a member of a professional organisation. 
00:40:39 Speaker 1
and you have yourself assessed yourself and you've said, I have a minimum of five years experience in this mineralisation style, and I understand all the risks, you can report it as a member. You don't need to be chartered professional as IAM member. Well... That's a professional challenge to state, aren't you? If you have the five years' relevant experience, then you can report under the current regulations.
00:41:11 Speaker 1
OK? I've got a lot of questions, so let me get through some of these ones on site here quickly. Cameron asks, a mining engineering consultant runs their own company, and I have my own PNPL. Perfect. Mohamed asks, how should a CP manage information provided by a specialist outside of his expertise when signing off on a report? So you need to be, as I stated previously, even though they're not signing off on the report,
00:41:41 Speaker 1
you need to have an understanding of their technical work sufficiently. You have to have sufficient comfort in what they're doing for you to sign off on it. So it's quite a simple thing. You are responsible. stops with the competent person signing off. If they're a specialist and they're a member of an organisation that has a code of ethics, you can get them to sign off on it as a co-signatory, in the report. That's the way I would do it. Let's see how it reads up there.
00:42:20 Speaker 1
It says if I sign a public document to the ASX and I'm an internal employee, is that acceptable? Yes, it is. Absolutely. But you need to state in your public statement around your certification. I personally am employed by this company. I have, you know, there's some really good examples in the teaching things around how you put forward issues that are.
00:42:51 Speaker 1
um going to be potential conflicts of interest so you could say okay i'm a geology manager and i have long-term incentives for increasing the resource by 20 percent and that's what you need to state those things so if you have conflicts that are potentially in conflict with uh reporting something that is bigger than where it was that's one of your goals you need to put that in your.
00:43:24 Speaker 1
statement as well as with being involved too and how many years experience you've got, let me ask as a gene exploration company overseas how can according my public report reach to be listing in asx what process is that, So if you wish to become a company that's listed on the ASX, then you'd need to understand all of the listing rules associated with the ASX. You will go through, the company will go through a process.
00:43:57 Speaker 1
with the ASX looking at what your budgets are, what your projects are, where you're working, who's in charge. But as a whole, that's not in the scope of this set of training. That's to do with listing on the ASX. It's not specifically about reporting material on the ASX. There's that one, if you're doing a public report for your company and it's listed overseas or not listed overseas,
00:44:28 Speaker 1
if it's a private company, then you don't have to report things in accordance with the job code. So that's simple. It's good practice too, because the JORC code or any of the parent codes of the Crisco code gives you transparency and the ability for international investors to understand, okay, it's reporting in accordance with the Genrec code or the JORC code or the Klen code, and reporting in accordance with things that we understand.
00:45:01 Speaker 1
Which I'd ask, historically, students in our expression project were reported from about 19,000 to about 420 years in the 60s, probably to be available. How is it possible in accordance with ASX code. 
00:45:20 Speaker 5
Hang on, let's get my mouse back onto the screen so I can scroll down, multiple screens sometimes, there we go.
00:45:34 Speaker 1
How is it possible in constant code, is it acceptable to have 25% twin holes to verify and validate? Yeah, so trenches are really difficult to validate and verify from 60-0. You would commonly exclude, most general resource practitioners would exclude them anyway because they're a different sample size, they're a different sampling mechanism, they're not compatible generally with core or RC.
00:46:10 Speaker 1
So in most cases you can use it for geology to help you define your mineralisation boundaries, you can use it to define where the trends are, but you would generally not use the actual assays. It's generally the way we would look at it. But if you've got drill holes and you haven't got the core, yes, drilling for 25% and showing that your interpretations are valid, that the variance between the new hole and the.
00:46:41 Speaker 1
old hole is not high, they make sense of including the historic data that didn't have QAQC. As long as you do QAQC with your new data. My heart asks, for a gene neurologist, what's a quick way to determine if a report is written in accordance with the JORC code? So the quick way is, is there a statement, this report is reported in accordance with the JORC code? So there is a public statement, there is a section that you must include as a continent.
00:47:12 Speaker 1
person in the report that says, I am Rod Carlson, I'm a member of the AIG and the LHIM, I have... 30 years experience, and I have a minimum of at least 10 years experience in this style of mineralization, then I am competent. Those statements must be in the report to be in accordance with the code, and it must have a table one. So a lot of listings on, say, the English train thing have companies report, oh, we're reporting in accordance with the top code, and they don't include a table one.
00:47:46 Speaker 1
It's not reported in accordance with the top code, then, because there's no table one. So, you know, if it goes to say it's reported in accordance with the top code, they must follow those rules. If a company announces several high-grade trouble with intercepts but does not disclose lower-grade results, what are the breaches in mind? Really good, really good question.
00:48:16 Speaker 1
i have personal experience i know exactly what you're talking about so the company is beholden to report things in a transparent material way so if there are results in the area that are, low grade and you're reporting high grade results you need to show them whether it's in oil like if you're reporting inspiration results you need to report all of the exploration results these days on the osx is plus are the easiest way to get around it you just list every result.
00:48:51 Speaker 1
you can summarize in the table then one of the important intercepts as long as you specify what your compositing rules are, But it's also very difficult because with historic results, if you purchased some ground and there's a lot of historic drilling, this is a real bugbear of mine, but Viasax also require you to re-report. Even if they've been reported previously on a job 2012, you come in as a new company, they need you to understand that you must re-report all of the historic results as well.
00:49:28 Speaker 1
Which is crazy ridiculous, but that's what they require. That was a trick for young players. Anyway, we're getting very close to time, so I'll keep going. There's a poll quiz question on screen, if you'd like to fill that out while we're closing out. I'm not re-validated by CPI, but I doubt I'm re-validated by chalk. I'm not sure what that question is, Aram.
00:50:00 Speaker 1
Anyway, Aram says, what's the difference? Key differences between JORC and 43-101 come in Module 6 in detail. But in essence, the key differences are the Oil Reserve must not include any material reported that is in the inferred category for 43-101. Whereas in JORC, you can have inferred material, and you must report what the percentage is,
00:50:33 Speaker 1
and you must show that economically it makes no difference whether it's in or not. It will still be economic. But under 43-101, you cannot include any inferred material. That's the primary one. are the subtle differences in terms of reporting is quite significantly different but that's one of the main ones uh there are a couple of other minor issues but i can't continue to fill out the.
00:51:06 Speaker 1
thing uh muhammad has been analogous to technical or hydrogeological data influences resource classification what level of verification is cp geologist expected to perform in relying on these specialist out inputs look i guess at the end of the day um as a geologist if you you have to show, reasonable prospects likelihood you have to sort of understand what the implications might be but it's not my reserve so you're not reporting.
00:51:39 Speaker 1
factual information about your technical parameters but you need to say look, there's recognition that the rock types are this, that the groundwater is at this level, there's no anticipation of issues around ground issues. So the geologist needs to show reasonable prospects. They don't need to necessarily go into a huge amount of.
00:53:16 Speaker 3
Let's go. Get your passports ready. Dad! Dad! Get your passports ready. I'm going out. I'll take you out. Come with me.
00:54:16 Speaker 3
I don't want to change it. Do you believe it? I don't believe it.
00:55:16 Speaker 8
Do you have a bag? I'll give you another bag. I'll give you another bag.
00:55:36 Speaker 3
Thank you.
00:56:56 Nicolette
phone